Note: This is still a work in progress. Also, if it’s too boring for you, skip to the last paragraph or so. At the least, read the post note for a cool thing about Daoism.
Introduction
Popular literature is one of the most influential guiding forces in setting cultural norms and behavioral expectations. Books that set the cultural tone of a country often encapsulate the values, history, struggles, and aspirations of its people. In the U.S., for example, books and stories such as “The Great Gatsby”, “To Kill a Mockingbird”, or “Charlotte’s Web”, encapsulate themes of justice, aspiration, and even shortcomings of the American dream. Other titles from around the world include “The Little Prince” by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, which highlights French ideals of love, freedom, and exploration of existential philosophy, or “King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table”, which helped shape British identity through emphasizing chivalry, honor, and adventure. 
Not only do these novels and tales reflect popular belief systems, but the retelling of these stories over centuries help perpetuate and maintain a country's traditions and identity. Moreover, the actions by protagonists, and lessons conveyed through allegory implicitly influence readers’ interpretations of morality, which actions and beliefs are rewarded or discouraged, and what to collectively believe about the world. In this paper, I argue that the classic Chinese folk story, Monkey King: Journey to the West has significantly shaped Chinese culture through inculcating Confucian, Buddhist, and classical Chinese ideals. These lessons especially shape how young Chinse children come of age which laterally translates to affect rates of economic growth and technological innovation.
By way of comparison with Journey to The West, The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn is an excellent reflection of the cultural causes for America’s successes and shortcomings. Considering Chinese and American culture through the lense of classic literature can help us understand each country’s economic and political trajectory and why they might ascend to, remain in, or fall from power within the continuously evolving world order. 


 Background On Chinese Political and Social Philosophy: 
The three most important religions in China are Buddhism, Confucianism, and Daoism. The three religions have evolved together symbiotically to shape Chinese political, spiritual, and social thought, affecting the values citizens hold, how they interact with their friends and family, and how political leaders make decisions. Amongst the three, the Confucianist scholarly tradition most deeply influences Chinese political and social life. Confucius’  three guiding principles identify subject object relationships that Chinese citizens must follow, such as, Ruler guides subject, Husband guides wife, and elder brother guides younger. The three guiding principles emphasize that the ruler is the moral and ethical example for the subject, who in turn owes loyalty and obedience to the ruler, emphasizing the importance of hierarchy in Chinese society. Next, Confucius’ five constant regulations include: Humaneness, Righteousness, and Propriety. A selection from Confucius’ Analects, helps depict these first three regulations: “Through mastering oneself and returning to ritual one becomes humane. If for a single day one can master oneself and return to ritual, the whole world will return to humaneness… The Master said, “Look at nothing contrary to ritual; listen to nothing contrary to ritual; say nothing contrary to ritual; do nothing contrary to ritual” (Selections from The Analects 12:1). Throughout his analects, Confucius continually emphasizes the importance of ritual and following the hierarchical order. The last two of the five regulations are, wisdom and Integrity. Overall, these principles build the foundation for Chinese social, political, and daily life which helps contribute to the longevity of an orderly, peaceful, stable Chinese nation state. 
Unlike Confucianism however, the Daoist sages rejected rigid hierarchy, and instead emphasized decentralized, autoregulating systems that help maintain harmony. Both politically and existentially, Lao-tzu and Zhuangzi write about finding harmony within the natural order (Dao), focusing on principles like simplicity, and non-action (wu-wei). In chapter seventeen of the Dao De Jing for example, Lao-tzu explains: "The existence of the best ruler is barely known to the people”. To Lao-tzu, great rulers do not enforce action through implementing stringent laws, instead they create systems and environments for order and harmony to arise naturally. This aligns with the Daoist principle wu wei (non-action), the Daoist concept of acting in accordance with the natural flow of the universe rather than imposing forceful actions that disrupt harmony.
While the two philosophies are meant to work together, in practice, Confucian thought continues to dominate over Daoist philosophy in governance, education, and social organization, especially because of how closely Confucius thought aligns with the Chinese government’s need for a stable society and centralized state. Daoism still, however, maintains significant influence in areas of personal spirituality, culture, and medicine. 
Finally, Buddhism is China’s primary religious practice. Instead of influencing political theory it primarily focuses on spiritual cultivation by letting go of desires, practicing compassion, and eventually achieving Nirvana. While Buddhism does not meaningfully conflict with Confucianism, Daoists do not resonate with the Buddhist emphasis on elimination of desires, or even rigid structure of Buddhist practice. They would likely argue that Buddhism brings people further from the flowing natural order of the universe through the cultivation of an unnatural or overly curated mind state.
Daoist, Confucian, and Buddhist Symbolism in Legend of The Monkey King
Journey to the West is an ancient Folk novel that has been passed down through the centuries. The story has been translated many times, many movies and even video games have been made through the book. The story is an important one that most all young Chinese people are aware of.  
In Journey to the West, the protagonist, Sun-Wu-Kong, is a rebellious Monkey with great fighting abilities and superpowers. The story begins with Sun Wu Kong rampaging through heaven and challenging various kings and religious leaders because he feels he is not justly acknowledged for his powers or given an important position in the heavenly order. Instead of accepting his given position and working diligently to rise through the ranks, he ignores customs and challenges the most important heavenly figures. The Buddha punishes him for rebelling by condemning him to spend eternity pinned down under a mountain with a magical seal upon it preventing Monkey from escaping. While Monkey’s actions initially seem bratty, they are a direct attempt to challenge a political and social hierarchy that continuously discourage his growth. Monkey’s early adventures through the heavenly kingdoms, and attempt yet subsequent failure, to challenge the pre-imposed social order embodies the consequences of interfering with Confucius’ Sangang: “Those who are inclined to offend against their superiors are few indeed. Among those who are disinclined to offend against their superiors, there have never been any who are yet inclined to create disorder” (Selections from the Analects 1:2). Sun Wu Kong is the exact opposite of Confucius’ description and is severely punished for his rebellion. The Journey itself begins centuries later when Tripitaka, a Chinese Monk, sets out on a quest to India to discover new Buddhist scriptures and bring them back to China. To help Tripitaka, Guanyin Buddha recruits Monkey to protect Tripitaka from danger on the journey. After Tripitaka frees Monkey from under the rock, Tripitaka tricks him into putting on a magical headband that helps Tripitaka restrain the powerful Monkey. After Monkey puts on the headband he screams out: “‘Stop, stop, directly you begin the pain starts, you can’t pretend it's not you that are causing it’. Tripitaka responds: “In the future will you attend to what I say?’… ‘Indeed I will’ said monkey… ‘and never be troublesome again?’ Asked Tripitaka… ‘I shouldn’t dare,’ said Monkey. So he (Monkey) said but in his heart, there was still lurking a very evil intent. He took out his cudgel and rushed at Tripitaka intending to strike. Much alarmed, the master began to recite again, and monkey fell writhing on the ground, the cudgel dropped from his hand. ‘I give in, I give in’ Monkey cried” (Legend of the Monkey King pg. 136). Even after he is freed from the rock, the Rebellious monkey is again forced into submission, perpetuating the theme that one cannot overcome their superiors. Continuously restraining Monkey is perhaps a stylistic choice that highlights the Confucian value of propriety. In his Analects, Confucius explains that one must, “Lead them through moral force (de) and keep order among them through rites (li), and they will have a sense of shame and will also correct themselves” (Selections from The Analects 2:3). While Tripitaka is certainly ruling through force in this passage, the text extrinsically instills fear in readers, encouraging a “sense of shame” for rebelling. This passage functionally encourages young readers to auto-“correct themselves” when faced with the decision of challenging an authority figure. 
Next, Monkey and Tripitaka set off on their journey to India, making a number of stops along the way. One of their stops is at the Cart-Slow Kingdom, where a group of Daoists have destroyed Buddhist shrines and temples, forcing anyone who resembles a Buddhist into slave labor. At Cart-Slow, Monkey demands one of of the Daoists release the Buddhist slaves. When the Daoists refuse to do so, Monkey kills him with his cudgel. Later, the Daoist leaders hear what happened and challenge Tripitaka to a series of competitions, including meditation to resolve the dispute. Tripitaka, of course, defeats the three Daoist leaders in all competitions. The preceding sequence of events sheds Daoist’s in a negative light suggesting that Daoists are amoral, and incompetent compared to Buddhists. After the encounter, Monkey states, “It was I who released the priests, it was I who destroyed the carts and it was I who slew the two task masters. Now the whole pest has been extirpated and you see with your own eyes that Buddhism is the true way. Never again follow false doctrines nor follow foolish courses but know that the three Religions are one” (Legend of the Monkey king pg. 248). Monkey uses the words “pest” and “foolish doctrines” to describe Daoism, both negative terms. Even though Monkey continues to explain that “the three religions are one”, in the same sentence he says, “and you see with your own eyes that Buddhism is the true way”. Although Monkey claims to support all religions, Journey to the West is biased towards Confucianism in its subliminal messaging and explicitly supportive of Buddhism in the narrative. Throughout the text, themes of obeying elders, following hierarchy, and pursuing enlightenment are encouraged whereas traditionally Daoist concepts are either not mentioned or discouraged. Even Lao-tzu himself is portrayed in negatively. In his paper, Categories of Being in the Cosmos of Journey to the West, published in the Duke University Press, Keith McMahon explains that Lao-tzu, “Is a figure for whom Monkey is relentless in his lack of respect and whom the novel as a whole render as a clownish figure”. Ironically however, Monkey himself exhibits Daoist characteristics in his spontaneity, rebellion against authority, Wu Wei in fighting, and pursuit of immortality. The decision to suppress Monkey’s reckless, and otherwise Daoist nature may have also been an extrinsic literary choice designed to discourage Daoist thought in favor of Confucianism and Buddhism. Keith McMahon further explains, “Even after his subjugation by Rulai 如來 (and, soon after that, by the forced wearing of the ring around his head), he still acts in ways that challenge the aura and dignity of the supposedly enlightened beings who preside over the cosmos”. Throughout the story however, Monkey’s innate rebelliousness slowly dwindles. By the end of the story, the author entirely dismantles Monkey’s autonomy by making him a Buddha. Through joining the very celestial order which Monkey tried so hard to dismantle, the story’s arch discourages challenging societal norms, discourages individualism, and culminates with a neutering of free will. The story suggests to the reader that anybody who attempts to challenge the hierarchy will only be consumed by it. Worse yet, the story portrays Monkey’s surrender as positive and something that will be rewarded, thus encouraging readers to continue to function within the confines of normativity, rather than considering reconfiguration.
Parallels Between Monkey King and Huckleberry Finn
Like Legend of the Monkey King, the American story, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, starts with a naturally rebellious character who shows disdain for pre-imposed social expectations. Huck’s narrative often critiques norms and pointless rituals in a way that mirrors Sun Wukong’s disdain for the rigid hierarchy of heaven. Both characters begin their journey’s seeking to overcome imposed constraints. Early on however, the stories diverge. Sun Wukong is restrained, whereas Huck escapes his home. Huck’s journey down the Mississippi River is a search for personal freedom and liberation, not just for himself but also for a runaway slave, reflecting American ideals of individual liberty triumphing over systemic oppression. Sun Wu Kong’s rebellion against heaven is a direct attempt to challenge a political and social hierarchy that continuously discourage his growth.  When floating down the Mississippi, as part of Huck’s narrative reflection, he says: “You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft.” This moment in the story underscores Huck’s individuality and the exhilarating sense of adventure he feels discovering a new world. 
Along the way, Both duos, Sun Wu Kong and Tripitaka, and Jim and Huck face various dangers and adventures. While Jim and Huck work together to overcome their challenges, Sun Wu Kong is directly subservient to Tipitaka. In what’s considered the moral climax of Huckleberry Finn, Huck is writing a letter to Jim’s former owner intending to reveal Jim’s whereabouts, when he stops, rips up the letter, and exclaims “All right, then, I’ll go to hell.” Huck decides he would rather be punished, even religiously, than turn in an escaped slave. According to the social and religious standards of his time, helping Jim escape is morally wrong. Despite these social pressures, Huck prevails in doing what he believes is just. Where Huck is liberated, and continues to defy social norms, Sun Wu Kong is continually restrained. By the end of the story, Sun Wu Kong even becomes a Buddha and joins the heavenly order, the same system he rebelled against. In the Chinese legend, the rebel, Sun Wu Kong, is portrayed as an evil demon who recklessly kills others, needs restraining and is ultimately subdued by the system he attempts to dismantle. By contrast, Huck’s adventures are glorified, and he is depicted as a fair and virtuous person. Where Daoist principles are discouraged and mocked in Journey to the West, Huck is deeply in touch with nature, instinctively follows adventure, and ebbs with tides of the dao as he effortlessly floats down the Mississippi.
Some Questions I Ask
Would Huck have managed to escape his home in another country where hierarchy and obedience were so emphasized? More importantly, would he even have considered setting out on adventure in the first place? Does America more fundamentally reflect Daoist values than China? Has China been overwhelmed by its imposed order and too heavily regulated by Confucian thought? Does China need a Daoist revolution?
Literature, Culture, and the Economy
Historically, the most powerful countries are ones who build groundbreaking technology and iterate upon those inventions most rapidly. For the past century, America has been the most powerful country in the world largely due to its impressive rate of innovation. The causes for America’s success are certainly many fold but can be attributed in part to its cultural traditions, encouragement of free markets, and forward thinking. The claim that culture can affect economic output is not unfounded. In Pantelis C. Kostis’ paper, Culture, innovation, and economic development, published in Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, he explains, “There is significant effect of culture on innovation and economic development…and the main cultural dimensions that hinder innovation and economic development are the prevalence of hierarchy, affective autonomy, and mastery”. 
Interestingly, the dimensions that hinder growth are the exact principles most emphasized in Chinese culture and Chinese religion and are retold through Journey to the West. Moreover, it is no surprise that China only experienced an economic boom when abandoning or at least de-emphasizing some of its previously held Confucian values. Jinhong Wang’s Paper, Factors influencing the transition of China's economic growth momentum, published in the AIMS press, revealed that, “capital accumulation, digital economy, and technological innovation were the major drivers shaping China's economic growth momentum transition”, all of which are steps away from the Confucian paradigm. China also shifted their political agenda, allowing for the privatization of companies, increased international trade, and establishment of free markets. 
Throughout human history, the most consequential innovations come from creative thinkers who challenge the conventional order, live outside of societal expectations, and think un-uniformly. Unfortunately, uniformity, congenitally, and discouragement of individual risk is so baked into Chinese culture. Even if the political order continues to shift, without a cultural revolution that implicitly changes behavior, China may not experience the next level of growth it needs. With that said, China has made significant strides in developing intellectual property and innovating new technologies, especially in the realm of AI, EV technology, and biotech. Confucian values such as collectivism, benevolence, and continuous learning, have helped positively influence behavior, organizational harmony and economic output. If China can integrate radical free thinking with social cohesion, perhaps it will soon surpass the U.S in technological innovation. Fundamentally, though the necessary change may take decades or even centuries as they involve deep social shifts that are embedded in stories like Journey to the West. While the Chinese government is extremely strategic, pragmatic and effective, redefining an entire culture may be a task too unsurmountable, especially if the necessary changes inherently challenge the government's reign of authority. It will be interesting to see how China evolves in the coming decades as it aims to build a prosperous society for all its citizens. 
Will the government be able to encourage radical free thinking without losing their stronghold on power, or will they, better yet, build a better social order that outperforms and out-innovates the world’s previous socio-economic models?

I’ll also add that while I do believe American ingenuity is a part of our identity, remaining complacent and even preventing other countries from innovating will hurt us, and more importantly, hurt all humans in the long run. 
I think it’s more likely that India rather than China becomes the next. While India faces many challenges, most notably pollution, extreme poverty, and corruption, these problems are in my mind, opportunities. Shifting an entire cultural identity and rebuilding a government, as in China, requires decades and often results in much destruction before positive growth. Addressing some of India’s problems on the other hand may only take a number of years, where with each incremental victory comes a large increase in economic output.
 
The end.
 
Post Note: Some historians and experts say, that the author wrote Journey to the West in reverse order to hide his true thoughts from the government. In the backward version, Sun Wu Kong begins as a Buddha who becomes disenchanted with a rigid structure that prevents autonomy. So, he sets out on a journey with Tripitaka, slowly realizing just how restrictive the deep state is. Finally, after trials trivails, and even a rebellion, Sun Wu Kong’s journey ends, stuck under a heavy rock, where he can finally spend the rest of his life, in peace. The reverse ending is perhaps an allusion to the Daoist principle, wú yòng (无用)—“uselessness”— which is paradoxically seen as a form of deep wisdom and survival: 

The “Useless” Tree: A Daoist Parable
 
Zhuangzi tells the story of a large, gnarled tree that is considered useless because its wood is too twisted and knotted to be made into furniture or boats. Because of this, loggers ignore it, and it lives a long, peaceful life, unlike the straight, “useful” trees that get cut down.

May the DAO be with you (Decentralized Autonomous Organization).

