Doc Fast’s English Class, Belmont Hill School, 2019: 

In today’s world of ubiquitous stimulation, advanced computer technology, and increased government influence, the classic novels, 1984 and Brave New World (“BNW”) have become ever more pertinent. Both novels depict dystopian regimes, which subdue the collective consciousness of their citizens. While the rise of China, North Korea, Iran, and like governments is certainly frighteningly reminiscent of Orwell’s authoritarian nightmare, the looming opioid crisis coupled with the imminent threat of automation, immersive media, and sedative technologies, makes Huxley’s dystopia equally tenable. 
Although the ultimate outcomes of both novels are similar, the World State in Huxley’s BNW and the Party in Orwell’s 1984 utilize contrasting means to command authority. To gain control over the citizens of Oceania, The Party ensures loyalty to Big Brother by altering official records, conducting mass surveillance, and instilling fear in the “masses.” The Party’s slogan articulates: “Who controls the past, controls the future, who controls the present controls the past", a tactic eerily similar to Chinas’ historical washing of the uprisings in Tiananmen Square, the creation of the great firewall, mass surveillance, and social credit system. Through editing official records, the Party and modern authoritarian governments alike not only control history, but people’s perspectives, and ultimately the truth.
Contrary to Orwell’s image of the future in 1984, the New World State in BNW leads everyone into submission through mind-numbing devices such as soma and grand orgies. Since the dawn of the World Wide Web in 1990, electronics and social media have enveloped our world in similarly mind-numbing ways. Whether through consuming mind altering substances, or even something as seemingly innocent as listening to music while taking a shower, society has conditioned us to crave constant stimulation. Similar to how the modern human brain craves instant gratification, most citizens of the World State depend on superficial satiety to overcome their repressed feelings of meaninglessness. Huxley depicts an amplified society where an overload of stimulants makes people oblivious to reality. A conversation between John, the protagonist, who is originally from a reservation where soma and conditioning do not exist, and Lenina, John’s lover, clarifies the effects of these "drugs." After John makes a fruitless, yet human, attempt to express his love for Lenina, she hums to John, "Hug me till you drug me…Kiss me till I'm in a coma. Hug me, honey, snuggly”. Without grasping John’s concept of love, Lenina’s sedated mind compares love and physical affection, to soma. This misguided equation of love and drugs is prevalent throughout the novel and is perhaps more frightening that the Party’s thought police.

I believe that the parallels between Huxley’s dystopia and our 21st century life will become increasingly apparent as tech continues to separate us further from nature. Contrary to Huxley’s vision however, I do not believe in a malicious government that subdues the populous, but rather in a society that becomes increasingly complacent and incompetent because machines, the things we are eluded into loving, insidiously replace our competence.
In reference to the core governing principles of the United States, Huxley’s social critique is more relevant to today’s challenges than Orwell’s. The latter’s societal forecast projects keeping populations in check through instilling fear. A Huxleyan society, on the other hand, reflects a situation where people are overcome by the very things that they are deluded into “loving” so deeply. While constant surveillance and web monitoring indicate Orwell’s dystopia may come to fruition, Huxley’s prophecy is equally if not more plausible, even in China, and especially in the United States. Our societies’ trajectory suggests, as Machiavelli would likely agree, that some combination of love and fear will eventually subdue our collective liberty.

