For centuries, physicians have discussed the mind body connection and its implications on mental health, physical health, as well as illness and chronic disease. Between new science discussing the gut brain axis, dopamine’s effects on movement, and the connection between our thoughts and hormones, we know that the mind directly impacts the body, but how deep does this connection really go? Can negative thoughts actually hurt the body, cause joint pain, and make muscles more tense? Likewise, can improving our patterns of movement change our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors for the better? This article is going to discuss the connection between our body and emotions, as well as how improving our movement patterns can improve our mental health.

Mind Body Connection

The mind-body connection is broadly defined as the relationship between a person’s mental-emotional state (mind) and their physical health/well-being (body). It suggests that an individual’s thoughts, emotions, beliefs, and attitudes can significantly influence their physiological functioning, immune system, hormonal balance, and overall health. For example, psychological stress can lead to physical symptoms like headaches, muscle tension, or digestive issues. Conversely, physical conditions or illnesses impact a person’s mental state causing anxiety, depression, or mood disturbances. 

Gut Brain Axis

The gut-brain axis is a recently discovered phenomenon that depicts the mind-body connection at work. The gut-brain axis is a complex bidirectional communication system between the GI tract and the central nervous system (spinal cord and brain) which influences various aspects of your physical and mental health. Your gut microbiota (bacteria in the gut) sends signals to the brain that produce neurochemicals and hormones which directly influence your thoughts and emotions. Likewise, your thoughts and emotions can send signals to the gut which change the composition of your gut microbiota and respectively alter your hormone production. That’s all to say that through your gut, your thoughts, emotions, hormones, and neurotransmitters, all interact with one another to directly influence what you feel in your body and your mind. In other words, gut dysregulation can cause physical disease, and contribute to mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety. A healthy gut on the other hand makes you stronger, healthier, happier and less stressed.

Depression and Joint Pain

Depression’s impact on joint pain is well documented in the literature. According to a study published by Madhukar H. Trivedi M.D, a psychiatrist from UT southwestern medical center, “Physical symptoms are common in depression”, in fact, “physical symptoms such as chronic joint pain, limb pain, back pain, gastrointestinal problems, tiredness, sleep disturbances, psychomotor activity changes, and appetite changes are often the presenting symptoms of depression”. 

Moreover, “A high percentage of patients with depression who seek treatment in a primary care setting only report physical symptoms”. Physical pain and depression have deep biological connections; two neurotransmitters that influence both pain and mood are serotonin and norepinephrine. In fact, dysregulation of these transmitters is known to cause both depression and pain. What this suggests is that not only does depression disrupt the gut brain axis which causes joint pain, but joint pain itself can disrupt the gut brain axis, which has a direct negative impact on our mental health. What I’m trying to say is that the connection between joint pain and mental health is a two way street. While Joint pain itself can make you more stressed, improving your postural and movement imbalances can make you calmer and happier. And to take it one step further, your patterns of movement and your posture can alter the composition of your gut microbiome.

Understanding the Connection Between Joint Hypermobility and Anxiety

Individuals with hypermobile joints (joints with unusually large ranges of motion) experience higher levels of anxiety. In fact, according to researchers from the University of Sussex, young people with joint hypermobility are more likely to have depression and anxiety, and that psychiatric symptoms are also more severe among hypermobile patients. The literature widely supports the fact that Joint Hypermobility is overrepresented among people with anxiety and is even associated with abnormal autonomic reactivity (poor response to environmental changes, emotional states, and stressors).  

In a study published by Jessica Eccles in the British Journal of Psychiatry, researchers conducted brain imaging to observe the correlation between joint hypermobility and anxiety. The study found that bilateral amygdala volume was greater in the hypermobile group than in the non-hypermobile group. Larger amygdalae are directly correlated with higher rates of anxiety. 

Interestingly, the study also found that the hyper-mobile group scored higher for interoceptive sensitivity, a trait commonly associated with anxiety. This is actually a really important point. What causes this increase in interoceptive sensitivity and why is it associated with hyper mobility? I would argue that the hyper mobility is actually what causes the increased interoceptive sensitivity - ie. because people’s joints feel loose, out of place, or just bad in general, they begin to overthink their symptoms and also become aware of very minute changes to their macro state, which can lead to and contribute to anxiety.

 

Dr. Jessica Eccles explains that, “In the general population about 20% of people have unusually flexible joints, but in a population of people with anxiety or panic disorder, about 70% have unusually flexible joints”.  Of course, this does not help us understand which condition came first, but like most conditions, the symptoms are likely mutually arising.

Improving Movement Efficiency 

If anxiety and joint mobility are directly correlated, is it possible to treat anxiety by reducing joint hyper mobility and also improving the way we move through space? 

I believe that answer is yes. 

When a muscular/movement imbalance pulls or puts pressure on a joint, it  puts strain on that joint causing the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and other neurotransmitters known to cause joint pain. According to this study, “An increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, … can lead to sickness behavior characterized by fatigue, irritability, alterations in sleep and appetite, and social withdrawal”, all of which arae symptoms of depression. It is clear that rumination over visceral pain symptoms can affect psychology and potentially lead to depression, but is also quite  plausible the actual physical joint pain itself can literally make you depressed. The connection between joint pain and depression, coupled with the fact that conditions like hyper mobility are strongly associated with anxiety, I believe that by improving our postural and movement imbalances, we can effectively take pressure off of our joints and improve our mental state.

Side note: Restoring ranges of motion in hyper mobile joints can be especially challenging because it requires meticulous adjustment, correction of old dysfunctional movement patterns, and precise retention-ing that is often more difficult than helping people with chronic joint compression. 

Conclusion

Our bodies directly impact how we feel on a regular basis. In this article, I propose that postural dysfunction and muscular imbalance may be a root cause as well as a powerful solution for many of the psycho-emotional problems we face.

 

While there are no definitive studies specifically discussing how improving efficiency of movement can improve mental health, there is plenty of evidence to suggest that if our bodies are less stressed out, our minds will be more relaxed. Learning to adapt to stress and reduce mechanical strain is key for becoming more resilient as well as reducing anxiety. I believe that through improving our biomechanics, and effectively moving more like elite athletes, we can actually begin to think more calm thoughts, become more confident, and live more fulfilling lives. Not only that, but through improving our efficiency of locomotion, I contend that our guts will become more robust.

 

Between our joints, muscles, gut, and brain, our bodies are connected in a multitude of ways that we are continuously learning about and discovering. The brain is not separate from the body, and treating the brain without accounting for what’s going on in the rest of the body will certainly not yield the best results. To resolve our society’s spiritual and psychodynamic tribulation, I don’t think we necessarily need more arbitrary philosophical abstraction, but instead we need a counterbalance of mechanical precision derived from a first principles understanding of the natural world.

Over 2,500 years ago, Hippocrates proclaimed that “all disease begins in the gut”, modern medicine has proved that statement to be true. The gut, body, and brain, are intrinsically tied, which begs the question, can moving in respect to your paleo biological blueprint strengthen your gut and make you more resilient to disease, depression, anxiety, and other ailments? 